Albert  Goldbarth
****!****
The Poem of the Little House at the Corner  of Misapprehension and Marvel
****!****

During Napoleon iii's coup d'état one of  his officers, Count de Saint-Arnaud, on being informed that a mob was approaching the Imperial Guard, coughed and exclaimed, with his hand across his throat, "Ma sacrée toux! (my damned cough).” But his lieutenant, understanding him to say "Massacrez tous! (massacre them all),” gave the order to fire, killing thousands--needlessly.                    --Guy Murchie
"He was mortared to death.”
 A pity, how we misspeak and mishear. 

--Or "martyred”? Not that/coin-flip/either 
makes a difference to the increasingly cooler 

downtick of a corpse's cells. "We heard the crazy mating joy 
of the loon across the water.” Yes, but what 

do we know, amateurs that we are? Loon, shmoon. 
It might have been dying, announcing 

its pain in those trilling pennants. It might 
have been the girl who was lost in these woods last week 

and never found by the volunteer searchers, 
it might have been her ghost 

with an admonishment. The truth is, 
even among ourselves we often can't distinguish pain 

from pleasure, not in our beds, our hearts, the tone 
of a poem on the final exam (a coin-toss). A pity, because 

we know the urgency of some utterance; 
and the intended goodwill of our listening; and 

the marvelous basic mechanics of speech, 
of lung: 300 million alveoli that, "if spread out flat,” 

as my eighth-grade science teacher preened, "would come to 
750 square feet, the entire floor space of an average house,” 

and she added that tired magic about how atoms 
of Julius Caesar and Napoleon and Beethoven did 

their fleet anachronistic dance in every inhalation 
of ours, although at thirteen I preferred to think 

that the atoms of Cleopatra's body--my Cleopatra, 
inflating her see-through empresswear 

with husky breaths--commingled with my blood, and also 
realized in my own dim way it wasn't only Einstein, 

Shakespeare, Madame Curie populating my oxygen, 
but also the smelly and scabby old man 

from across the street who'd died last year 
when the late-shift ward nurse heard (as she said in her testimony) 

"med injection” instead of (as the outgoing 
ward nurse told her) "bed inspection”--altogether 

an unfortunate example of my theme . . . although 
exempla abound, misapprehension 

also dancing inside us at the atomic level. 
Someone thought the gate was locked, she always locked 

the gate in the late afternoon when the haze set down 
and the sun for a moment seemed to carmelize the lake top, 

so the gate was locked; except that it wasn't, 
and seven days into it nobody's found the girl 

or a scraggle of hair or a single ribbon. I tell you 
we're amateurs, we're sometimes bungling amateurs,

of the minutiae of our own lives. When I heard the sounds 
that gurgled from my chest as my wife was leaving 

into the dense, conspiratorial Austin, Texas night,
I couldn't have said if it was defeat 

or relief. She couldn't have said which one
she'd have been happiest to cause. We only knew

that I'd been wrong at times, and she'd been wrong at times, 
and that our total errors, if spread out flat, 

become the house we live in. They're another system 
inside us, along with the cardiac and the pulmonary,

they're moving us toward the horizon line. And when 
enough errors accumulate there, that's what 

we call the future. Even now, as you read this, 
someone in that unknowable distance 

is breathing you in. 



~~~~!~~~
