Patty  Seyburn
****!****
Location, Location
****!****

So when you go wherever it is you will go
take the moon with you 

and make it wear that democratic white shroud,
pocketless, since rich and poor, 

we take nothing with us, save a small stick or dowel
in the casket, so we can all

burrow through the earth to the Holy Land
when the time is right.

Please forgive that I confessed your amusement 
at Shakespeare's "mewling and puking”

in my eulogy. (No one laughed--my delivery was off--
but Otto the Undertaker smiled.) 

He told me that when I shovel some dirt onto 
your soft wood box,

suggestive of the trees where Eve and Adam hid
from the Lord who called--

what were they thinking?--I should press the shovel 
back into the pile 

before the next mourner--my husband, not a Jew 
but a fine man, you said 

once if a hundred times--picks it up because to bury 
the dead is a mitzvah 

that should not be diluted, each person who performs 
the act should get the credit, 

which we will need when that Miscreant Angel
comes to collect his chit. 

Otto dates my step-second cousin twice-removed 
and let me say: I hope 

they marry. Someone who guides the bereaved through 
such a smorgasboard of ritual 

with Virgilian ease deserves as much happiness 
as can be gainsaid 

in the Detroit metropolitan area, legally. By the way, 
ma, we never recovered 

your wedding ring and pearls after some gonif 
pilfered and pawned them 

but trust me, when I find him, I'll shake him 
‘til the rich give anonymous charity 

or I'll walk away from trouble the way you taught me to--
otherwise, it follows you 

home and perches near the deli tray without bringing 
even a cup and saucer.

Were you ready, ma, when your soul and body 
signed their final confession, 

the angels acting as scribes? No shomer in Rochester Hills 
to stave off ill-tempered

ghosts, ungrateful relatives, rodents, to watch you
until you could don 

your guf hadak, the celestial garment being fashioned 
while your soul went 

back and forth between homes. I must steel myself
like the egg that hardens 

when cooked, the egg I salt and bite into, half-
listening to the rabbi's 

easeful voice: together we recite, offering God
consolation for His loss, 

though I tell my children that you are with God,
and they repeat it so blithely 

and I am so busy with mourner's occupations--
the burying, the tearing,

the endless repetitions, double-taking every mirror 
I pass that offers no vision--

I start to believe what I want to believe: your absence 
here is your presence there,

wherever there is, every piece of land a personal
Elysian field, the best room

at the Fontainbleau, pied à terre with an obstructed view
of oblivion, a corner booth

at the Rascal House and the miniature danish taste
like manna, as they always did.



~~~~!~~~
