Connie  Voisine
****!****
"The Altar” by George Herbert
****!****

Tulips panted against the wall. So much need to feed
 a crisp stem, I thought, as we put our fingers 
in the bullet holes above the bed. Typed captions translated
photos of Rivera, Kahlo, Trotsky and his wife 

in her boxy suit, devoted smile, that hopeful hat
with bent feather below an image of the assassin 
who would get her husband in the end. George Herbert was 
what I translated, The Temple, the only book I brought, 

where he says the heart must be a stone on which 
to build God's altar--no love without affliction:
my hard heart meets in this frame. In those days, 
I loved the jungle, spread like wool below 

an unsteady sky and the crumbling pyramid's altar top 
flocked with moonlight. I loved the monkeys 
throwing sticks and rinds at tourists from their nests 
in the trees. The noise at night, the hysterical crush 

of insect limbs rubbing, animal want, all night banged 
against the window, each with an urgent song of me me me. 
How loud the fecund world can be. Mi corazon duro, 
I wrote, bored, and smoke rose from other tables, 

from the wheels of the cars on the cobbled roads, 
and once I saw a mouse, suicidal, enter the frantic 
crowd. I cried out at the park in Mexico City 
where Indians, ropes on their ankles, dove like 

fatal birds to the ground while a Hassid, in his 19th-century 
cloak kept after me, Speak English? English? He said, 
We've all become vegetarians. There isn't a butcher 
for miles. I watched his black hat disappear 

into the swarm of vendors, masked dancers. Was that it, 
devotion? Young and gorgeous for it, I crept away 
one night, met a German hippie and he pulled my swimsuit 
aside in the volcanic lake. The fat Costa Rican's coffee plantation 

unfolded below, the ranging packs of filthy dogs, the water 
so hot and sulfured I gleamed like something ephemeral. 
Sometimes I saw movies, cheap Hong Kong action films 
dubbed into Spanish with Mandarin subtitles. But that started 

to get difficult, the young men dying with extravagance, 
the improbable ballet of whizzing swords, gun fights 
in teahouses filled with caged birds. Herbert, 
consumptive and small country parish-bound, 

wrote that struggle must be the same as resolution, 
as faith itself, while he suffocated in his sad minister's bed, 
for years arguing with God and himself. It's the uglier 
business, willing yourself from despair to belief. 

In those days, I thought the saints, robes heavy with must, 
with ancient, gnarled hands, deserved the nothing 
they felt their way toward. In those days, my favorite saints 
were the ones who burned away young--I admired them 

in the cathedral paintings, hooded eyes, the brutal 
wings of their ribs, gilt halos, baroque frames. What does it mean, 
devotion? Mothers weep in the corners of those paintings
while a man, each morning, sweeps the church floor.


~~~~!~~~
