Robert  Pinsky
****!****
History of My Heart
****!****

One Christmastime Fats Waller in a fur coat 
Rolled beaming from a taxicab with two pretty girls   
Each at an arm as he led them in a thick downy snowfall 

Across Thirty-Fourth Street into the busy crowd 
Shopping at Macy's: perfume, holly, snowflake displays. 
Chimes rang for change. In Toys, where my mother worked 

Over her school vacation, the crowd swelled and stood 
Filling the aisles, whispered at the fringes, listening 
To the sounds of the large, gorgeously dressed man, 

His smile bemused and exalted, lips boom-booming a bold 
Bass line as he improvised on an expensive, tinkly 
Piano the size of a lady's jewel box or a wedding cake. 

She put into my heart this scene from the romance of Joy, 
Co-authored by her and the movies, like her others– 
My father making the winning basket at the buzzer 

And punching the enraged gambler who came onto the court– 
The brilliant black and white of the movies, texture 
Of wet snowy fur, the taxi's windshield, piano keys, 

Reflections that slid over the thick brass baton 
That worked the elevator. Happiness needs a setting: 
Shepherds and shepherdesses in the grass, kids in a store, 

The back room of Carly's parents' shop, record-player 
And paper streamers twisted in two colors: what I felt 
Dancing close one afternoon with a thin blonde girl 

Was my amazing good luck, the pleased erection 
Stretching and stretching a the idea She likes me, 
She likes it, the thought of legs under a woolen skirt, 

To see eyes "melting” so I could think This is it, 
They're melting! Mutual arousal of suddenly feeling 
Desired: This is it: "desire”! When we came out 

Into the street we saw it had begun, the firm flakes 
Sticking, coating the tops of cars, melting on the wet 
Black street that reflected storelights, soft 

Separate crystals clinging intact on the nap of collar 
And cuff, swarms of them stalling in the wind to plunge 
Sideways and cluster in spangles on our hair and lashes, 

Melting to a fresh glaze on the bloodwarm porcelain 
Of our faces, Hey nonny-nonny boom-boom, the cold graceful 
Manna, heartfelt, falling and gathering copious 

As the air itself in the small-town main street 
As it fell over my mother's imaginary and remembered 
Macy's in New York years before I was even born, 

II 

And the little white piano, tinkling away like crazy– 
My unconceived heart in a way waiting somewhere like 
Wherever it goes in sleep. Later, my eyes opened 

And I woke up glad to feel the sunlight warm 
High up in the window, a brighter blue striping 
Blue folds of curtain, and glad to hear the house 

Was still sleeping. I didn't call, but climbed up 
To balance my chest on the top rail, cheek 
Pressed close where I had grooved the rail's varnish 

With sets of double tooth-lines. Clinging 
With both arms, I grunted, pulled one leg over 
And stretched it as my weight started to slip down 

With some panic till my toes found the bottom rail, 
Then let my weight slide more till I was over– 
Thrilled, half-scared, still hanging high up 

With both hands from the spindles. Then lower 
Slipping down until I could fall to the floor 
With a thud but not hurt, and out, free in the house. 

Then softly down the hall to the other bedroom 
To push against the door; and when it came open 
More light came in, opening out like a fan 

So they woke up and laughed, as she lifted me 
Up in between them under the dark red blanket, 
We all three laughing there because I climbed out myself. 

Earlier still, she held me curled in close 
With everyone around saying my name, and hovering, 
After my grandpa's cigarette burned me on the neck 

As he held me up for the camera, and the pain buzzed 
Scaring me because it twisted right inside me; 
So when she took me and held me and I curled up, sucking, 

It was as if she had put me back together again 
So sweetly I was glad the hurt had torn me. 
She wanted to have made the whole world up, 

So that it could be hers to give. So she opened   
A letter I wrote my sister, who was having trouble 
Getting on with her, and read some things about herself 

That made her go to the telephone and call me up: 
"You shouldn't open other people's letters,” I said 
And she said "Yes–who taught you that?” 

–As if she owned the copyright on good and bad, 
Or having followed pain inside she owned her children 
From the inside out, or made us when she named us, 

III 

Made me Robert. She took me with her to a print-shop 
Where the man struck a slug: a five-inch strip of lead 
With the twelve letters of my name, reversed, 

Raised along one edge, that for her sake he made 
For me, so I could take it home with me to keep 
And hold the letters up close to a mirror 

Or press their shapes into clay, or inked from a pad 
Onto all kinds of paper surfaces, onto walls and shirts, 
Lengthwise on a Band-Aid, or even on my own skin– 

The little characters fading from my arm, the gift 
Always ready to be used again. Gifts from the heart: 
Her giving me her breast milk or my name, Waller 

Showing off in a store, for free, giving them 
A thrill as someone might give someone an erection, 
For the thrill of it–or you come back salty from a swim: 

Eighteen shucked fresh oysters and the cold bottle 
Sweating in its ribbon, surprise, happy birthday! 
So what if the giver also takes, is after something? 

So what if with guile she strove to color 
Everything she gave with herself, the lady's favor 
A scarf or bit of sleeve of her favorite color 

Fluttering on the horseman's bloodflecked armor 
Just over the heart–how presume to forgive the breast 
Or sudden jazz for becoming what we want? I want 

Presents I can't picture until they come, 
The generator flashlight Italo gave me one Christmas: 
One squeeze and the gears visibly churning in the amber 

Pistol-shaped handle hummed for half a minute 
In my palm, the spare bulb in its chamber under my thumb, 
Secret; or, the knife and basswood Ellen gave me to whittle. 

And until the gift of desire, the heart is a titular, 
Insane king who stares emptily at his counselors 
For weeks, drools or babbles a little, as word spreads 

In the taverns that he is dead, or an impostor. One day 
A light concentrates in his eyes, he scowls, alert, and points 
Without a word to one pass in the cold, grape-colored peaks– 

Generals and courtiers groan, falling to work 
With a frantic movement of farriers, cooks, builders, 
The city thrown willing or unwilling like seed 

(While the brain at the same time may be settling 
Into the morning Chronicle, humming to itself, 
Like a fat person eating M&M's in the bathtub) 

IV 

Toward war, new forms of worship or migration. 
I went out from my mother's kitchen, across the yard 
Of the little two-family house, and into the Woods: 

Guns, chevrons, swordplay, a scarf of sooty smoke 
Rolled upwards from a little cratewood fire 
Under the low tent of a Winesap fallen 

With fingers rooting in the dirt, the old orchard 
Smothered among the brush of wild cherry, sumac, 
Sassafras and the stifling shade of oak 

In the strip of overgrown terrain running 
East from the train tracks to the ocean, woods 
Of demarcation, where boys went like newly-converted 

Christian kings with angels on helmet and breastplate, 
Bent on blood or poaching. There are a mountain and a woods 
Between us–a male covenant, longbows, headlocks. A pack 

Of four stayed half-aware it was past dark 
In a crude hut roasting meat stolen from the A&P 
Until someone's annoyed father hailed us from the tracks 

And scared us home to catch hell: We were worried, 
Where have you been? In the Woods. With snakes and tramps. 
An actual hobo knocked at our back door 

One morning, declining food, to get hot water. 
He shaved on our steps from an enamel basin with brush 
And cut-throat razor, the gray hair on his chest 

Armorial in the sunlight–then back to the woods, 
And the otherlife of snakes, poison oak, boxcars. 
Were the trees cleared first for the trains or the orchard? 

Walking home by the street because it was dark, 
That night, the smoke-smell in my clothes was like a bearskin. 
Where the lone hunter and late bird have seen us 

Pass and repass, the mountain and the woods seem 
To stand darker than before–words of sexual nostalgia 
In a song or poem seemed cloaked laments 

For the woods when Indians made lodges from the skin 
Of birch or deer. When the mysterious lighted room 
Of a bus glided past in the mist, the faces 

Passing me in the yellow light inside 
Were a half-heard story or a song. And my heart 
Moved, restless and empty as a scrap of something 

Blowing in wide spirals on the wind carrying 
The sound of breakers clearly to me through the pass 
Between the blocks of houses. The horn of Roland 

V 

But what was it I was too young for? On moonless 
Nights, water and sand are one shade of black, 
And the creamy foam rising with moaning noises 

Charges like a spectral army in a poem toward the bluffs 
Before it subsides dreamily to gather again. 
I thought of going down there to watch it a while, 

Feeling as though it could turn me into fog, 
Or that the wind would start to speak a language 
And change me–as if I knocked where I saw a light 

Burning in some certain misted window I passed, 
A house or store or tap-room where the strangers inside 
Would recognize me, locus of a new life like a woods 

Or orchard that waxed and vanished into cloud 
Like the moon, under a spell. Shrill flutes, 
Oboes and cymbals of doom. My poor mother fell, 

And after the accident loud noises and bright lights 
Hurt her. And heights. She went down stairs backwards, 
Sometimes with one arm on my small brother's shoulder. 

Over the years, she got better. But I was lost in music; 
The cold brazen bow of the saxophone, its weight 
At thumb, neck and lip, came to a bloodwarm life 

Like Italo's flashlight in the hand. In a white 
Jacket and pants with a satin stripe I aspired 
To the roughneck elegance of my Grandfather Dave. 

Sometimes, playing in a bar or at a high school dance, I felt 
My heart following after a capacious form, 
Sexual and abstract, in the thunk, thrum, 

Thrum, come-wallow and then a little screen 
Of quicker notes goosing to a fifth higher, winging 
To clang-whomp of a major seventh: listen to me 

Listen to me, the heart says in reprise until sometimes 
In the course of giving itself it flows out of itself 
All the way across the air, in a music piercing 

As the kids at the beach calling from the water Look, 
Look at me, to their mothers, but out of itself, into 
The listener the way feeling pretty or full of erotic revery 

Makes the one who feels seem beautiful to the beholder 
Witnessing the idea of the giving of desire–nothing more wanted 
Than the little singing notes of wanting–the heart 

Yearning further into giving itself into the air, breath 
Strained into song emptying the golden bell it comes from, 
The pure source poured altogether out and away.


~~~~!~~~
