Tom  Sleigh
****!****
After Vallejo
****!****

intensity and height


I want to write, but only foam comes out,
I want to say so much but it's all crap -- 
there aren't any numbers left that can't be added up,
nobody writes down pyramids without meaning it.

I want to write, but I've got a puma's brains;
I want to crown myself with laurel, but it stinks of onions.
There's no word spoken that doesn't dissolve in mist,
there's no god and no son of god, only progress.

So come on, to hell with it, let's go eat weeds,
eat the flesh and fruit of our stupid
tears and moans, of our pickled melancholy souls.

Come on! Let's go! So what if   I'm wounded -- let's go
drink what's already been drunk,
let's go, crow, and find another crow to fuck.



hat, coat, gloves


Right in front of the Comédie-Française 
is the Regency Cafe; and right inside it, there's this room, hidden, 
with a table and an easy chair. When I go in, 
house dust, already on its feet, stands motionless. 

Between my lips made of rubber, a cigarette butt 
smolders, and in the smoke you can see two intensive 
smokes, the cafe's thorax, and in that 
thorax an oxide of elemental grief. 

It matters that autumn grafts itself into other autumns, 
it matters that autumn merges into young shoots, 
the cloud into half-years, cheekbones into a wrinkle. 

It's crucial to smell like a madman who spouts 
theories about how hot snow is, how fugitive the turtle, 
the "how” how easy, how deadly the "when.” 



best case


Look, at the very best, I'm someone other -- 
some guy who walks around marble statues, who enters 
his adult clay into indexes of blood, and feels 
the rage and fear of the fox chased to its hole -- 

and if someone anoints my shoulders 
with indigos of mercy, I'll declare 
to my absent soul that there's no hellishly 
paradisal elsewhere for me to go. 

And if they try to choke me on the sea's wafer, 
telling me it tastes like His flesh, more acid 
than sweet, like Kant's notions of truth, I'll cough 

it all up: No, never! I'm other as a germ, a satanic 
tubercle, a moral ache in a plesiosaur's molar: 
in my posthumous suspicions, all bets are off! 



another day of life


I'll die in my apartment on a cold bright day, 
with nobody around, the apartment next door gone 
dead still while wind whistles through the balcony, 
though the branches somehow aren't moving, just as the sun 

doesn't move, everything's so quiet, so frozen. 
Parked cars, plastic bags bleached in the bare trees, 
a couple of those Mylar balloons tied to a chair on 
the balcony next door, celebrating something, maybe? 

... now sagging listless on the floor, 
as if every last molecule had been pierced by a needle -- 
Tom Sleigh is dead, he stared up into the air, 

the sky was pale blue as usual and he couldn't feel 
the cold coming through the window, and there wasn't 
much to say or not say -- and nobody, anyway, to say or not say it. 



my jailer won't weep to be my liberator


My cell's four walls, whitening in the sun, 
keep counting one another -- but their number 
never changes, despite my jailer's 
innumerable keys to chains 

wrenching the nerves to their extremities. 
The two longer walls hurt me more -- who knows why -- 
their salt-stained cracks like two mothers who die 
after labor, but give birth to twin boys 

whose hands they still hold. And here I am, 
all alone, with just my right hand to make do 
for both hands, raising it high into 

the air to search for the third arm 
that between my where and my when 
will father this crippled coming-of-age of a man. 



insomnia is the only prayer left


How childish is the spectacle of the stained 
glass's holiness: the night doesn't give a shit what 
goes on inside human beings, the night 
has its own web of dendrites refuting the inane 

prayers prayed for the dying, for the confessions 
going on between earthworms and earth, between 
the way a man argues with his own shoulder bones. 
All the while, barracudas in a coral canyon, 

a sea turtle flying, swim through fathoms 
and fathoms of images that keep crashing 
on the shore of the eye that never shuts -- 

and smarts in its sleeplessness staring 
up into the dark shadowed by stingrays, gas stations, 
the slow flapping wing of a lottery ticket.


~~~~!~~~
